Artificial A Personal and

Intelligence Retrospective Early

in Medicine: on its Evolution Emergence

Casimir A. Kulikowski, Ph.D. Department of Computer Science Rutgers University New Brunswick, NJ 08903

to diagnostic ABSTRACT Methods introduced general systems gave general traces of AIM A.I. of into artificial clinical Evolving the intelligence decision-making from pattern of ideas, notions were gradually research from recognition and helped the biomedical article Lusted's calculate discriminant disease through methods and wealth center. approach program meant reasoning that

problems research in popularized analysis [O-l]

was Science

made widely through in of [L-l] use were to

known

within

community the

1959.

Ledley and Warner rule to to while thyroid screening

subsequently

Bayes' [W-l],

1970 to 1974.
researchers way

posterior diagnosis

probabilities methods and

of diseases applied multi-disease

problem-solving crystallize to either knowledge with mid-1970s.

such methods

knowledge-based

by the

In 1978 the early systems second-generation frameworks for reasoning or representations. events emphasis to new, more This paper in the early evolution at participated.

Classical hypothesis-testing the Cornell Index. for disease classification were used by Collen at Kaiser Permanente based on the screening methods well-known [El]. This of of data Signal collected analysis in their and pattern Howard balance all applied Yet, traditional to multi-phasic recognition while Bleich's disorders

consultative

his colleagues

sophisticated

some of the major systems, Resource,

on the developments the author

were applied on

in ECG interpretation, characterized acid-base by had to 1970 been problems. be little

a decision-tree

the Rutgers

in which

formalizations computer-assisted this

Prelude: Assisted The first
to clinical in the NIH a for

The State-of-the-Art in Computer Clinical Decision-Making in lQ70
to apply artificial intelligence

decision-making there appeared community

despite

progress

enthusiasm

in the medical methods. could not then, as of by

proposals

(AI.)
to

at large for computer-based difficulties in acceptability that were as early

decision-making Biotechnology decade efforts Cornell logical and of computer-aided of Lipkin,

evolved

at Rutgers of a grant Program. in initiated and

University proposal They statistical by at to who the the first the

Some of the now, human methods

1970 during

the preparation rapid

be blamed diagnostic of formal

on the awareness reasoning

of the complexities captured inference.

Resources diagnosis, Hardy, School

followed methods pioneering New explored diagnosis of Bayesian York

advances

logic or probabilistic were discussed For preoccupy disease the

Many on "The

of these problems a conference Diagnostic Jacquez of topics relationships between the Ledley statistical published and \J-l] that

as 1963 during edited identification multi-disease diseases, causal contrast vs. 1965, in In by

Engle

held at the University Process." it still between is striking temporal

of Michigan proceedings,

Medical

[L-4], approaches

probabilistic disorders. theory, utility

to see a clear researchers: of entities, of It courses

of hematological inference,

The applicability and Boolean logic

discrimination,

and the

describing

an individual a book work on the

patient's diseases. not only

problems

characterization Medicine gave many of clustering [L-2].

Uses of Computers summarized of logical

permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specfic permission.

Biology

some of his early but also application

in the field

diagnosis, of the theory in

practical examples methods and utility

1987 ACM O-89791-248-9/87/0011/0199

$1.50

199


medical Ledley become and other evidenced Medical diagnosis only It with advisor S. Nordyke application diagnosis. of thyroid analyzed. practical screen were five

diagnosis. anticipated routine formal by

It many in the

is again application

interesting

to that

see that have now analysis (as of

a research application (particularly biomedical become intelligence the time, with occurs brought

group of

at

Rutgers

University computer to

devoted science

to the methods of Having artificial of as he in In at

of the concerns in clinical articles

advanced artificial and with for that

of decision in the

intelligence) medical some game playing

problems the

methods the many

decision-making Journal

research acquainted programs and

practice. of

Decision-Making). with the in

his experiences Recision-Making widely

In 1968 Lusted summarized Bayesian and likelihood methods for book, Introduction to Medical years the became for many on the subject. I first problems. of Hawaii, that recognition had accumulated and to I Clinic contact methods a large to if it to wished see program Over only for application diagnostic found
a

and planning solving with such Amarel be used problems. project the rather

I was skeptical diagnosis.

they could problem In speaking

help in dealing

practical in clinical

"noisy"

[L-5], which

available

monograph that

to my attention real, he

the possibilities which the detailed interpretation

of more general

was

in this clinical at the

same year decision-making University suggested pattern

became My Professor Dr. in

involved doctoral Michael Robert medical base them be him that pattern the most of the problem, one of based of of

representational characterizing particular, Stanford chemical applying the notion

frameworks, complex to pointed could recognition year that

could

DENDRAL knowledge guide

Watanabe, of

as a case where structures pattern

of plausible' search than

of the Straub Nordyke disease He to the large develop also

to investigate

the possible data have would help

be used to methods I began detailed went help provide

for an interpretation

of a mass spectrogram, directly. to think a beyond

It was in about the for purely diseases. acceptable that this moving a deeper the human

records, wanted

following that

of finding

a more could

description

of disease
a

a computer

processes diagnostic Only would in our

structure with a

number

of non-thyroid clinic. developed selected of features the information I rapidly developing system did had that

conditions several

reasoning that way, I did a decisive of the uses.

that by not

referred years,

to his specialty Watanabe approaches combinations that (class-featuring

the previous

phenomenological

association based

of symptoms like methods realize in my

-reasoning

physician,"

recognition discriminating He suggested CLAFIC method the In working major screening seiecting Over programs disease at automate statistical while there system. the trusting suspicious produced was just "black somehow It met was

computer

become thinking, towards that

a decision. compression) that

to physicians. represented from consideration diagnostician As the Rutgers aa to result a purely

at the time

I investigate

change "cognitive

engineering

approach model"

in particular with and problems the most for [K-l], the

to the medical in

Nordyke,

computer indeed

of the meetings with the medical Institutes on Department from

with

Amarel faculty

I came to from the as well

consultation couple carrying

consist a group

and joined

him and other of Computer biological school, of Computers the

discriminating of years,

sets of manifestations. I developed diagnosis based on

newly-formed faculty the ecology, Research Rutgers. a William program student of a

Science,

the next

sciences, in writing Health in to

psychology, a proposal establish a at of Dr. resources had been a of and and Dr.

out sequential

and the National Resource Raub, of Dr. wider It

sets of symptoms, Straub

signs, and laboratory tests for thyroid These were placed into operation [N-l]. Nordyke's of of the thyroid this work problems of thyroid reports data. clinic and However, with physicians that they were helping provide that the to very scores It I had was while even production

Biomedicine

within analysis

This wae done with who headed at that of the NIH William set was of also at

the encouragement biotechnology Raub time.

completing would be

in 1970 it became clear acceptability of other it was clear

Yamamoto, interested biomathematical in at Tufts an in the

at the University in the application modeling research time England Dr. The article England proposed would Gorry that

Pennsylvania, simulations practice. William Center, at "Medicine Problems Medicine, M.I.T.,

and was very techniques

In observing his data of the

the reaction programs,

use of Nordyke's

biomedical about this New with influential New physician [S-l].

and his interpretations, probabilities

and discrimination to see that to be widely mathematical the work processing

Schwartz working and in published the which tasks of Change"

Medical entitled and of the Journal that

by my programs disheartening was unlikely nature of the

based on the same data.

in collaboration Computer: he of eloquently the

G. A. Gorry Promise

somewhat completed box"

used unless the

ezplaincd. at this juncture, Saul Amarel, during job interviews, that to build I

more

routine

be good had been a

Professor

who was proposing

candidates

for computerization


pioneer test also

in developing the by

sequential [G-l], of the problem8 studying [G-2]. Schwartz to me his computer turned that became idea8 [S-2]. our focus Rutgers

statistical

method8 this

for time

Early When priority that continuing However, Computers on ways diagnostic presented recognition in terms School, problems M.D. Bayesian computers explored education untimely physician8 I

selection confronting

in diagnosis

and was at computerized cognitive

Developments of Artificial in Medicine: 1970-74 joined was Rutgers to in 1970 my

Intelligence first research method8 Watanabe. Resource on working of the that of pattern a disease of 1971, Medical and other wa4 an that in make We Hyams' to these think to

clinical of have it, I

decision-making human

processes

to extend developed the

the pattern a broader with

recognition class Professor Research

diagnosticians with of

As chance would

I had

of problems,

had interviewed which medical M.I.T. participated development The making of and ripe inquiry. I wa8 area. the for making cognitive diagnostic NIH it artificial Saul department

in 1970, in the course of hope of establishing within a the science

research

he described school.

as soon as the Rutgers in Biomedicine of formulating process. itself which by might Dr. At alternative first, syntactic

medical As things

was funded, one

I started alternative

collaboration8 in that of AIM approved the first

out it was the Tuftsand he encouraged catalyst8 in the

formalizations methods the fall

important

was to try

enable rules. Lyon we tried

one to describe During to of Rutgers develop disorders with. very how

Resource of clinical

in

1971,

of grammatical and that together

of research to was problems the of

in the application biomedical Investigator, decisionfor with the time was schemes in dealing

I was joined rules for thyroid

Hyams

intelligence Amarel in placed

grammatical Hyams strongly to

Principal the above,

disease, hematologic we were acquainted who need while more to we like well felt learn also human in this. brought

charge of

As I have described development

b&statistician would term8 =think"

alternative

representation problems.

and inferencing

endeavored method8 However, an end

specialists.

the application and did very death in

of Bayesian 1971

in medical

investigations. In the the Mt. last Sinai those the 1971, months School aspects free of Aran of working Safir, Medicine of medical of together who he had at very which thereby fruitful In the as a studies. grammatical rapidly a key point In our that

introduced interested represent involve leaving nuances fall of research Together

me to Dr.

an ophthalmologist became

in the possibility encyclopedic physician we were we wanting. breakthrough of the problem assistant

of using computer knowledge, the

models to

reasoning more itself. Weiss

retrieval solving joined

to pursue by his

process

Sholom with

pursuing experimented

doctoral diseases but

representation8 found with effect disease. Saul Amarel, first P.I. of the Rutgers trying out a program on the PDP-10 Resource computer. and effects. of the During Rutgers, of generation systems the at next four years these seeds and the planted University at Stanford, Tufts-M.I.T., the perturbations myriad parameters struck qualitative them conceptual

for ophthalmological took clear place.

It was at this that

discussions

Safer it became relationships This normal At first describing patterns crucial

to "speak the

the language the cause and of a of causes a model subject physiological We then to look states, at such to Due to

of the clinician,"

one needed to represent that explain led us to examine we considered that pathological of normal idea that physiology

pathogenesis developing

the nature could values be of

conditions.

we soon abandoned description8

this approach. one ought

on the

Pittsburgh

all germinated and produced the first of knowledge-based artificial intelligence decision-making.

of pathophysiofogical

for clinical

a8 "elevated intraocular pressure," numerical values of physiological

rather than parameters.

specific The


notion summary

of

a of

pathophysiological observable Sholom of these model a it major had Weiss helped ideas, for

state events

as

an

abstract shortly a working a causal Safir had In the good. to

variability observations involve whereas diseases biological have fixed effects. As we put representation program than a treatments, topics. where argument, representation treatments diagnosis. consider customizes peculiarities meant keyed are patient situation history medication or someone be treatment that off to and

among some the might

patients

that

the

mapping of of and

between have to states to of would What and

followed formulate

and pathophysiologicel probability-like mapping be purely because processes the of from the causal there relations probabilistic

states would measures pathways inherent links could

afterwards. computer network suggested its addition, mechanisms chances treatment, important. and expertise would A first glaucoma the Fall

uncertainty, deterministic.

model that

and produced glaucoma. of

(CASNET) 8s

definitional

we concentrate

on this cause fairly

disease because of blindness. well-understood of therapy, were 8 be resistant

Furthermore,

variability

significance that

themselves states. of causes

because of succeeding making The of the

be weighted: unique was a

be no Aristotelian

influenced

the selection

between network

in the causal consultation specialist

modeling with

emerged

Yet at the same time,

the disease could of capturing available.

specialist program

possibility

the knowledge

more and more glaucoma it also that became gave if they selected were that idea component a standard than take For of a patient rather diagnostic to clear

knowledge that on

into

this

in a computer

8 diagnostic to physicians the latest

help make it more widely version of CASNET the Mt. We work S. Fu at

alone would program particularly

be much less exciting advice referred

was run Sinai gave the entitled paper of d8t8

retrospectively

on in

to controversial of situations a matter extend contained from that he of the the a we an ~8s to

data from of 1972. of this K. [K-2].

School of Medicine the first

Satir deliberately surgical and to vs. medical we a fourth

a number able

scientific 1972 IEEE Pattern one could using model the of be or the

treatment level, would that to

presentation Conference by apply same the At Recognition" different causal glaucoma the Professor

December "Modern how acquisition underlying that the the it

on Decision

and Control Our

in a session chaired

which

or actions Feinstein's

be triggered I suggested there must regime treetment

stressed

It WBS at this time that

strategies network During model level of the the states early and we layered

as

the

`environmental"

which to the [F-2]. This of therapy set of patient's has kind alternative, may and of a of

knowledge. viewed

1973 we continued realized placed at summarizing representation

to develop could data level

therapeutic having into 8 fixed the

and his environment nuances the

8s a three lowest

of knowledge. actual second the data, that For

set of treatments specific who

outcomes, that resistant make

manifestations pathophysiological a third more tension at the level readings first 8s a broadly

patient,

adjusted

account

and 8t describe instance, of is a into

manifestations unique. of being who that

an individual someone 8 certain

diagnostic

hypotheses of disease. into the pressure state. grades state field

instance, to

the mechanisms level elevated of very can

on the eye within map intraocular small angle

a certain

high range concept which Likewise,

may be chosen for a nonstandard has a history for relies more frequent

of poor compliance checkups administration

abnormally inferred segment measurement an abstracted and certain tangent blind these linked variant another anterior suggested representing spot," gl8UCOm8. glaucoma.

recommended

pathophysiological

less on his own

in the Bnterior closure,*

the medications. Our was progress sufficiently with the rapid glaucoma that Safir consultation suggested meeting program taking a of the to enlist in of of

of the eye by gonioscopy pathophysiological patterns are a "nasal both of visual described step,"

can be mapped of "angle

screen

loss measured on the experts 8s by human of the with of one one and such 8s while define loss associated that states that to the mechanisms

prototype Association this the

to demonstrate for Research in April including textbook Podos of several

at the annual and Ophthalmology.

It was at researchers co-author

or an "enlargement of field

meeting help

1973 that distinguished Dr. Bernard

we were able clinical Becker, joined

patterns causally of states (such could of

It was S&r's Sholom

suggestion to describe could

glaucoma, the major Dr. Steven Irvin that Pollack our reassuring to many

be linked pathway pathway segment that

on the diagnosis of Washington Hopkins

and treatment

Weiss and I proposed be used as sngle

the glaucomas.

He was initially of Johns models own

by his colleague, and by Dr. It was very in glaucoma felt correspond

of glaucoma

ClOSUre glaucoma), glaucoma,

University, University.

define the eye,

open angle

yet another,

a secondary in order

glaucoma to take

due to a mass in the We also and so on. into account statistical

for us to see that causal of their paths

specialists of reasoning.

of disease did indeed

At the same

202


time, they made us aware of the limitations of the first prototype and suggested many improvements. It was around this time that I first met Ted Shortliffe, who was working on his doctorai dissertation at Stanford University. Shortliffe waz already committed to the development of a consultant program in infectious diseases, and when he visited the Rutgers Resource we discussed the problems of reasoning under uncertainty and the need to develop consultation systems that would be understandable to the clinician. At that point Shortliffe was experimenting with reasoning strategies motivated by theorem proving techniques. He felt that PLANNER-type consequent theorems provided a good mechanism for goal directed problem solving, and his initial control structure for MYCIN waz designed to "avoid the shotgun approach of system based solely on mechanisms a diagnostic analogous to antecedent theorems." Shortliffe was also strongly influenced towards a modular representation in the form of rules by Waterman's use of production systems in the form of situation-action rules, and by the heuristic DENDRAL project experience at Stanford. There is no question but that even during these early stages of research in 1973 there was a strong contrast between the emphasis of Shortliffe's work on the modular and judgmental components of clinical decisionmaking as opposed to the causal "architectural approach" taken by our group at Rutgers. Meanwhile, we also became aware of work being carried out by Harry Pople on problems of abduction in biomedical theory formation. After initiating a collaboration with Dr. Jack Meyers on consultation in internal medicine, he applied many of the ideas of abductive reasoning to diagnosis. In fact, the first version of their consultation program was called DIALOG (for diagnostic logic) [P-2], and stressed the hierarchical nature of the organization of medical knowledge. Qualitative levels of uncertainty were used to link manifestations to the disease entities. While the research emphasis of the Pittsburgh group may have seemed quite different from ours and from that of the Stanford and Tufts-M.I.T. groups [P-l], in retrospect we all shared the same concerns of introducing heuristic uncertainty measures, modularizing knowledge, and providing more flexible strategies of consultation that would be acceptable to human experts.

Ted Shortliffe at Stanford completed his rule based approach for therapy advice in infectious diseases [S-4]. It was also in 1974 that a second research resource sponsored by the NIH's Division of Research Resources SUMEX-AIM made W&9 established at Stanford. explicit in its title what was only implicit in the Resource--the advancement of artificial Rutgers [F-3]. This resource also intelligence in medicine provided time-shared computing facilities (initially on a PDP-10, later on a DEC-20) which helped many of the research groups get started with more fledgling sophisticated programs. At the same time, with the William Baker at the strong support of Dr. Biotechnology Research Resources Program of NIH, SUMEX fostered the idea of shared intellectual and physical computing resources through the development of an AIM community. At Stanford, Shortliffe's research continued to be the major focus of investigations into clinical decision-making. Together with his advisor, Bruce Buchanan, he developed a model of inexact reasoning based on non-probabilistic confidence factors [S-5]. This served as an important component of the inference mechanism of MYCIN IS-S]. The work on artificial intelligence in medicine became more widely known when a regular series of AIM workshops sponsored by the Rutgers Resource were begun in 1975. The first workshop waz small and brought together the AIM researchers themselves. It waz most valuable in informally exchanging tips on interdisciplinary collaboration problems, and in clarifying some of the assumptions behind each group's research approach. The workshop in 1976 was larger, and included presentations by many researchers taking alternative approaches to medical decision-making and modeling. These meetings helped disseminate artificial intelligence ideas and set the stage for the introduction of knowledge-based methods in a number of other research areaz (geology, chemistry, and engineering). Within the Rutgers Resource during 1974-76 we were able to broaden the scope of our collaborations in Safir's ophthalmology. Thanks to efforts, an ophthalmological network of glaucoma specialists (ONET) was formed to systematically enter their knowledge and expertise in glaucoma diagnosis and therapy into our program. Sholom Weiss joined the Mt. Sinai School of Medicine as a researcher who became one of the first "knowledge engineers," before the term had been coined. He traveled tirelessly around the country working with our collaborators at various medical centers: Washington University, Johns Hopkins University, University of Miami, and the University of Illinois, ~9 well as Mt. Sinai. By 1976, the glaucoma

Steps

Towards

Coneolidation

of AIM:

1974-78

The year 1974 saw the completion of the first two in artificial intelligence in medicine. Sholom Weiss completed his work at Rutgers on the causal model approach to medical decision-making [W-2], while
theses

203


consultation program had been expanded to handle a large veriety of secondary glaucoma conditions, as well as being much more sophisticated in the primary glaucomas. It was at this point that we proposed to test the system by having it challenged publicly at the meeting of the American Academy of Ophthalmology that was held in Las Vegas in October, 1976. A Symposium on Glaucoma, sponsored for the National Society for the Prevention of Blindness, included five specialists and a moderator (Dr. Anderson), with our computer program as the sixth "panelist." We also demonstrated our program at the Academy's scientific exhibit, and gathered cases from experts who wished to challenge the system. During the Symposium on Glaucoma, the computer was able to respond to all the cases presented to it. It provided a summary of the diagnostic and treatment recommendations which could then be compared to the comments of the specialists. The resulting exchanges of the panelists and the commentary on the computer output were transcribed in the book, Discusaiono on Glalrcoma, edited by Drs. Lichter and Anderson [L-3]. The program did very well in matching the diagnostic conclusions of the specialists. There were some discrepancies in the treatment recommendations, but these involved no more variation than that found among the specialists themselves. Our most anxious moment took place just before the panel was about to start its discussions. Someone tripped over and unplugged the phone line that connected our display terminal in the immense labyrinth of the Las Vegas Hilton Hotel conference rooms. It reminded us most vividly of the fragility of the technology. Luckily, the connection was re-established one minute before start time. With the success of this demonstration, the consultation system proved that the expertise of specialists from around the country could be pooled and then through computer networking disseminated to a large number of non-specialists. The CASNET system was the first example of a high performance prototype covering detailed diagnosis and treatment knowledge in a specialty which could actually give advice at the level of an expert consultant [W-3], [W-4]. Kevin Kern helped program the full-fledged CASNET system, while Peter Politakis joined in subsequent knowledge-base refinement research. Also during 1976 Shortliffe published his thesis on MYCIN [S-6], and the group at Stanford continued the of development the MYCIN program, leading subsequently to an evaluation of the system by a group of specialists in infectious diseases [Y-l]. These results showed that a rule based system could be brought to a high level of performance. The work at Stanford was

Peter Politakis (seated) presenting his research system on knowledge-base refinement to S. Weiss, K. Kern, Bnd C. Kulikowski (standing 1. to r.)

widely disseminated by Drs. Feigenbaum and Lederberg, who were able to convince many skeptic81 biomedical scientists and computer scientists of the importance of domain knowledge as the basis of practical problem solving systems. It was Edward Feigenbaum who popularized the phrase "knowledge-based systems" [F-l]. An early example of such a system in clinic& decisionmaking, besides CASNET, DIALOG, and MYCIN, was the Digitalis Advisory System developed by the TuftsM.I.T. group [G-3]. It showed that a mathematical compartmental model of digitalis release could be used in conjunction with qualitative reasoning to capture An clinical expertise in the administration of digitalis. important article by Pauker, Gorry, Kassirer, and Joutnal of Medicine in 1976 Schwartz in the American [P-l], gave a first outline of how Minsky's frame-besed structures [M-l] for describing and recalling information about a present illness could be used in a consultation program. The article gave a number of examples of how general symptoms could trigger a set of related diagnostic entities into short term memory where they would be subject to hypothesis testing. The Present Illness Program (PIP) was critical in showing that the process of gathering medical information, generating hypotheses, testing them, and selecting new information together represented a complex cycle of inferencing that did not easily fit into a traditional formal framework. At this time, the work on INTERNIST was being extended by Pople to involve reasoning about multiple diseases and associations of a causal nature [P-3]. The CADEUCEUS program that is still evolving shows the of knowledge degree to which complex repreSent8tiOnS

204


are needed with and psychological practice

for

these research carried

tasks. into out

These practical were and problems by Elstein of clinical

experiences by judgment

[F-2] MD: [F-3]

A.

R.

Feinstein,

Clinical

Judgment.

Baltimore, intelligence: Pub. 80-2071,

programming

experiments

supported

Williams G.

& Wilkens, "The Res.

1967. seeds of Resources, artificial NIH

his colleagues

Freiherr, Div.

Pll, WI.
Conclusion: In easy review Szolovits complex Also article Medical its year "shells" Stanford as vehicles many thereby looking to back mark

SUMEX-AIM,"

Dec. 1979.
[G-l] G. A. Gorry 1, pp. 490-507, G. A. Gorry, Methods and G. 0. Barnett, diagnosis," 1968. "Computer-assisted Inform. Med., vol. clinical decision45-51, Pauker, "Experience Biomed. with Ree.,

1978 as the Enrl First AIM Cycle
on the in was as the early clinical end in that [S-7], who probabilistic structures Schoolman some [S-l]. of the The for early previous evolution of the year systems that

of the of first artificial it cycle is of by as

a model vol. [G-2] 1973. .[G-31 G. `Capturing considers vol. [J-l]

of sequential

Comp.

intelligence development.

methods 1978 It

decision-making,

making,n

12, pp. S. G.

an excellent the need for reasoning. gave broad work in an in in 1977, had systems following [V-5] systems at in

of the first and

generation

was published as well

A.

Gorry,

H.

Silverman

and

Pauker and

stressed reasoning diagnostic AIM

clinical clinical

expertise: responses 1978.

both categorical at this time, to

A computer program that to digitalis," Amer. .I. Med., diagnostic process," Proc.

knowledge

64, pp. 452-460, J. A. Jacquer, Data of Michigan,

and Bernstein year,

Ed., "The Processing Michigan,

dissemination seen the session marked based first Care of

Biomedical University [K-l]

in Science

Training 1964. recognition Syst. Sci.

Program,

Symposium (SCAMC) clinical the on

on Computer highlight of

Applications The

the AIM general

C. A.

KuIikowski, diagnosis,"

"Pattern IEEE Trans.

approach Cybern.,

decision-making.

to medical

emergence

model-building These served domains, knowledgewas bound for specific

vol. SSCS, pp. 83-89, 1970.
[K-2] data Proc. C. A. Kulikowski base utilization 1972 IEEE 1972. Ledley of and medical value reason,= and theory L. B. aid Lusted, our vol. "Reasoning logic, of 9-21, and S. M. in sequential Conference Weiss, pattern `Strategies recognition," and Control, of

AIM

work:
consultation and

EMYCIN expert of the which

and EXPERT for developing medical different

[W-5]

at Rutgers. non-medical

on Decision

demonstrating with

the generality generation, decision

pp. 103-105, [L-l] R. S.

based approach. to experimentation

The first

prototypes

foundation probability how

diagnosis: Science,

Symbolic understanding 130, pp.

diseases, had come to an end. References

physicians

1959.
evaluation vol. 48, pp. of acid-base 1689-1696, (L-21 R. Medicine, [L-3] P. S. Ledley, New York: Lichter and Use of Computers 1965. Discussions 1977. "Mechanical diagnosis Ass., vol. of 166, on in Biology and McGraw-Hill, D. Grune J. in

[B-l]
1969. [D-l] .

H.

L. J.

Bleich, Clin.

"Computer Invest.,

disorders,'

Anderson,

, R.

Davis,

`Interactive 1979. "Clinical practice,*

transfer rules,* Artificial

of

expertise: Intell., vol.

Glaucoma. [L-4] M.

New York: Lipkin of 1958. Lusted, and data

and Stratton, D. Hardy, Med.

Acquisition

of new inference

12, pp. 121-158, [E-l]

correlation judgment: Science, Psychological vol. 194, p. hematological pp. 113-125, (L-51 ( L.

differential

A. S. Elstein,
and medical

diseases,n

J. Amer.

research

696, Nov. 1976.
[E-2] A. S. Elstein, L. S. Schulman, Solving: MA: An and S. A. Sprafka, Analysis Harvard oj Univ. Clinical Press,

Introduction IL: Thomas, for

to 1968.

Medical

Decision-Making. [M-l] M. Minsky, in Ed. A.

Springfield, "A New York: Nordyke,

Medical
Reasoning.

Problem

framework of

representing Vision, 1975. and for the Comp.

Cambridge,

knowledge," P. Winston,

The

Psychology

Computer

1978.
[F-l] E. A. Feigenbaum, Themes in Proc. and Nat. "The Comput. art Conf. of of artificial knowledge New York: intelligence: engineering," AFIPS, case studies

McGraw-Hill, C.

[N-l] C. W.

R.

A.

Kulikowski,

Kulikowski, diagnosis

"A
of

automated Biomed.

comparison thyroid

of methods dysfunction," 1971.

1978, p. 221.

Res., Vol. 4, pp. 374-389,

205


[O-l] medical

J. E.

Overall

and

C. M.

Williams, Vol.

"Models 6, No.

for 2, pp.

[S-6]

E.

H.

Shortliffe,

diagnosis," 1961. Pauker, Taking

Behavioral

Sci.,

Consultations:
probabilistic Intell., [V-l] vol.

MYCIN.
and reasoning in

Computer-Based Elsevier, New York:
Pauker, medical 1978. independent diagnosis,"

Medical
1976. and

134-141, [P-l] W.

[S-7] P. Szolovits G. A. "Towards a Gorry, the J. P. Kassirer, simulation illness by of and clinical

S. G.

"Categorical

S. G. B.

Artificial

Schwartz,

11, pp. 115-144, "A

cognition:

present

computer,*

Amer. J. Med., vol. 60, pp. 981-996, 1976.
[P-2] model H. Pople, J. Myers, and R. Miller, "DIALOG: A

W. Van Melle,

domain

production-

rule system

for consultation

programs,"

in Ptoc.

6th Int.

Joint Conf. Artificial
[W-l] H. R. Warner, with "Experience of congenital

Intell., Tokyo,
A. F. Toronto, Theorem

1979, pp. 923-925. and L. G. Veasey, diagnosis

of diagnostic

logic for internal

medicine,"

in Proc. 1975, pp.

4th Int. Joint Conf. Artificial
848-855. [P-3] H. Pople, "Artificial medical

Intell., Tbilisi,
intelligence

Bayes'

for computer

heart

disease," 1964. "A

Ann.
system and

N.Y.

Acod. Sci.,

approaches in Proc.

to IEEE

Vol. [W-2]

115, pp. 558-567, S. M. Weiss,

computer-based

consultation,"

Intercon.,
[P-4]

3113, 1975. "The problem formation solving," of composite in Proc. MA, hypotheses 1977, pp.

computer-aided

diagnosis Rutgers University,

for model-based therapy," Ph.D.

H. Pople, Artificial

in diagnostic

5th Int. Joint

Dissertation, [W-3] "A 1978. [W-4] S.

1974. S. Amarel, vol. and A. Safir, medical 145-172,

Conf.
[S-l]

Intell.,

Boston,

S. Weiss, model-based

C. Kulikowski, method Artificial for

1030-1037. H. M. Schoolman 1978. "Medicine of and change," 1970. J. P. Kassirer, clinical 1973. artificial intelligence antimicrobial and the computer: and L. M. Bernstein, and therapy," "Computer Science, vol.

computer-aided 11, pp.

decision-making," prognosis,

Intell.,
A. by

use in diagnosis, 200, pp. 926931, [S-2] The W. B.

Weiss,

C.

Kulikowski, computer,"

and

A.

Safir,

"Glaucoma

consultation

Comput.
"EXPERT: in Proc. 1979,

Biol.
A

Schwartz, and

Med., vol. 8, pp. 24-40, 1978.
[W-5] system S. Weiss and C. Kulikowski, for developing consultation Artificial models," Tokyo,

promise

problems

New England

J. Med., vol. 283, pp. 1257-1264,
[S-3] W. B. Schwartz, A. Essig, "Decision analysis

6th
pp.

G. A. Gorry, and

Int.
[Y-l]

Joint
V.

Conf.
L. Yu,

Intell., al,
"An baaed

judgment,"

Amer. J. Med., vol. 5, pp. 459472,
[S-4] E. H. to Shortliffe, advise

942-950.

et

et

evaluation consultant,"

of

the

al,

"An

performance

of a computer-

Comput.

program therapy," [S-5] inexact

physicians

regarding

Cornput. Biomed.
Shortliffe 1975. and reasoning

Res., vol. 6, p. 544, 1973.
B. Buchanan, "A model vol. of 23,

Programs Biomed., vol. 9, pp. 95-102, 1979.

E. H.

in medicine,"

Math. Biosci.,

pp. 351-379,

206


